Title: Basic Django Web Application
Date: 2012-03-23 15:57
Tags: django, programming, python
Category: Software

For the past few weeks, I have been writing quite a lot in PHP, more
specifically, CodeIgniter, and to be honest, writing web applications in
CodeIgniter is really easy and intuitive, and even though I came across
the MVC pattern (or MVT, for that matter) for the first time in Django,
I quickly forgotten even the basics of Django. So, in to prevent myself
from forgetting something like this again in the future, I am writing
this blogpost, to explain the basic of rendering a web page with Django.
I will only explain the most necessary functionality, so that means I
will use shortcuts whenever possible, and I wont be using any model in
this example, maybe I’ll write that sometime in the future.

Okay, lets start. First of, after installing the django, run
`django-admin.py startproject basicDjango` to start a new project. Next,
move into the project directory, and create a new folder named
`templates`. This will be the folder you use to store the template files
for the project. We will come back here again later. Now, open up
`settings.py` and find the line for `TEMPLATE_DIRS`, and add the path to
the template directory there. Next, on your project’s root directory
level, create a new file named `views.py`. Open up the file, and enter
these code which are the basic  functionalities that are in a view
function:

    :::python
    # import the necessary modules
    from django.shortcuts import render_to_response

    def index(request):
        # render the template index.html with the context
        # text equals to hello world
        return render_to_response('index.html',{‘title’:’Index Page’,'text':'Hello, World!'})

The way it works is, it loads up the template file(index.html), and will
replace the special tags in the template file with dictionary data you
passed in the second argument. Next, create the template file itself, in
the templates folder that you made before, create a new file index.html,
and put this inside it:

    :::html
    <html>
        <head>
            <title>{{title}}</title>
        </head>
        <body>
            <h1>{{text}}</h1>
        </body>
    </html>

Now, you got everything setup, and now, you just need to route the
request to the view function to handle, so to do that, open up urls.py,
and add this to the url pattern:

    :::python
    import views
    urlpatterns = patterns('',(r'^hello/$',views.index),)

Now, you can run `python manage.py runserver`, and navigate to your
browser to `http://localhost:8000/hello`, and you should see the word
‘Hello World’ printed out.

Note: If you are on windows, make sure the template paths are written
with forward slashes ‘/’. That’s all for now, but I think I will make
another post about how the Template system works in django without
shortcuts, and also about the model. Well, maybe next time.
