Title: Lambda Expression with C#
Date: 2012-05-30 21:40
Tags: C#, programming
Category: Software

Previous in my post regarding delegate, I talked a little about
anonymous method that can be used with delegates, there are other forms
to declare inline functions. Both of them are collectively known as
anonymous functions of C#. Here is one example that shows how different
method assignments are used with delegate.

    :::csharp
    class SampleClass
    {
        public delegate void SampleDelegate(string s);

        public void SampleMethod(string s)
        {
            Console.WriteLine(s);
        }

        public static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            SampleDelegate a = SampleMethod;
            SampleDelegate b = new SampleDelegate(SampleMethod);
            SampleDelegate c = delegate(string s){Console.WriteLine(s);};
            SampleDelegate d = (x) => {Console.WriteLine(x);};

            a("hello");
            b("hello");
            c("hello");
            d("hello");
        }
    }

All those methods above do the exact same thing, SampleDelegate d is
method with lambda expression. Lambda expressions are expressed with the
lambda operator, “=>”. The left side of the lambda expression specifies
any input parameter that it may have, and the right side holds the
expression block.

There are several usage pattern of lambda expression. First up is
expression lambda, which basically is just a lambda expression with an
expression on its right side, it return the result of the expression.
Here is an example.

    :::csharp
    // parentheses can be omitted if it only has one parameter
    x => x*x;

    (x,y)=>x*y;

    // use empty parenthese for expression without any parameter
    ()=>9*9;

The second one, statement lambda, is just a lambda expression with a
statement on the right side.

    :::csharp
    x=>{ string s = "Hello,"+x;
        Console.WriteLine(s);
    };

Well, that’s it for the most basics of the lambda expression, there are
other uses of lambda expressions, such as for use with LINQ, but I will
talk about that later, as that involves some C# features that I’m not
familiar with yet. BTW, if you wondered why the lambda expressions above
are missing the return/parameters type, that’s because it is able the
infer the type from context, but of course, you can still specify the
type explicitly if that’s what you want.

Update: found an interesting example of the usage of the lambda
expressions [here][l1], here is a code snippet from it:

    :::csharp"
    using System;
    using System.Collections.Generic;

    class Program
    {
        static List<T> MyWhereMethod<T>(IEnumerable<T> source, Func<T, bool> predicate)
        {
            List<T> l = new List<T>();
            foreach (T item in source)
                if (predicate(item))
                    l.Add(item);
            return l;
        }

        static void Main(string[] args)
        {
            int[] source = new[] { 3, 8, 4, 6, 1, 7, 9, 2, 4, 8 };
            List<int> filteredList = MyWhereMethod(source, i => i >= 5);

            foreach (int z in filteredList)
                Console.WriteLine(z);
        }
    }

So, well there is how some of the lambda queries are done.


## References:
* <http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb397687.aspx>
* <http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/24255/Exploring-Lambda-Expression-in-C>

[l1]:http://blogs.msdn.com/b/ericwhite/archive/2006/10/03/lambda-expressions.aspx
