Title: Windows Phone 8, WinRT, and so on.
Date: 2012-06-24 13:01
Summary: Some thoughts on the new announcement regarding Windows Phone.
Tags: rants, windows phone, wp7, wp8
Category: Software

This post is basically a rant. TLDR:

- AWESOME: WP8 is awesome! Native code support, multicore processors,
simply awesome!

- LAME: Current WP7 devices just got screwed. No clear date on release
data, no clear information on development model for the new OS.

Well, it’s a bit late for a blog post, but I just got the time to write
about it, so here it goes, the Windows Phone 8 announcement thoughts.
Few days ago, on the 20th (or 21st here where I live), Microsoft finally
unveiled the game plan for Windows Phone with Windows Phone 8. I myself
followed the announcement live in the middle of night here, and well,
overall, I have mixed feelings about it.

![Windows Phone 8 Start Screen][ph]

Let’s start with the awesome and exciting stuff. Windows Phone
8 is going to be AWESOME. Really. To be honest I didn’t think Windows
Phone 7 is a full fledged phone OS. I love it, but to be honest, it has
too many flaws that would make me wouldn’t even consider it as my main
phone OS if it weren’t for it being so beautiful. From the lack of basic
phone features such as USSD support to native code support, it even has
some really stupid flaw such as the inability to separate music volume
control from alert volume. [Windows Phone 8][link1] is a break that would
allows Windows Phone to actually compete with iOS and Android on an even
level. One thing that excite me the most is that it will allow
developers to run native C and C++ codes on it, this will open up
Windows Phone 8 to some really awesome apps that can’t exist on WIndows
Phone 7 because of its restrictions, from the many popular game engines
such as Unity and UDK, and it also allows developers to actually develop
its own DirectX based games. This is one BIG plus.

Other awesome stuffs includes multicore-support, Nokia maps integration,
NFC support, and SD-card support. These are mostly end-user features
that is pretty awesome as well, but it would also allows developers to
take advantage of these capabilities for more variety of applications.

Now, lets move on to the bad thing. One really really BAD thing IMO, the
current Windows Phone 7 devices will not be able to receive upgrades to
Windows Phone 8. In other words, the new applications that take
advantage of the new Windows Phone 8 native code support will not be
able to run on the current devices. Needless to say, I immediately
canceled my plan to buy a Lumia, and I believe I am not the only one to
do this, nobody would spend money to actually buy a phone that is
essentially dead. Yes, they just killed Windows Phone 7 and the existing
devices running it. This really bummed me. It makes me feels like being
cheated on, they made people to develop for it, and then they just
killed the platform. Yes, the current Windows Phone 7 applications will
still run on the next Windows Phone 8, but with the next version of
Windows Phone 8 being built on a completely different architecture, I
don’t think it is possible to just run the application like that.
Actually, this change doesn’t really matter from a developer’s
perspective, but developers are developing for the users, and with
Windows Phone 7 itself is a reboot from the Windows Mobile, its hard for
me to feel I am not wasting my time developing for Windows Phone 8 which
is another reboot from Windows Phone 8. To make things worse, there is
not words on the development tools on Windows Phone 8 yet. One of the
things that Microsoft emphasized was that the Windows Phone 8 will share
a lot of code with Windows 8, but it seems like its not that simple. The
[blog post here][link2] sums it up pretty nicely. With a lot of things being
so unclear here, I doubt people will feel like developing for Windows
Phone 8 for now.

The consolation that they offer to the current Windows Phone device
owners are the intermediate Windows Phone 7.8 update that says will
bring new features from the Windows Phone 8. But with the lack of native
code support, I don’t think that will make much change anyway. The only
thing they promise in the Windows Phone 7.8 update is the new
homescreen, which allows for new size and colors for the live tiles,
which I personally think sucks anyway. It makes the homescreen too messy
for my taste.

Other new features that I am not too sure about it the new screen
resolutions support. Windows Phone 8 will support two new screen
resolutions, 1280x768 and 1280x720, which is cool, except that why do
they have to make it in a different aspect ratio?? WHY??. Another thing
is, in-app purchase support. Cool, except that even the Windows Phone
marketplace is not even available where I live yet. So, its meaningless
to me.

[link1]: http://windowsteamblog.com/windows_phone/b/windowsphone/archive/2012/06/20/announcing-windows-phone-8.aspx
[link2]: http://wildermuth.com/2012/6/22/Windows_Phone_8_-_What_do_I_think

[ph]: http://windowsteamblog.com/cfs-filesystemfile.ashx/__key/CommunityServer-Blogs-Components-WeblogFiles/00-00-00-53-71-metablogapi/4477.StartScreen_5F00_Dave22_5F00_630D4973.png
