Title: Data Binding in .NET
Date: 2012-06-10 10:37
Tags: C#, programming
Category: Software

I am now trying to use the concept of MVVM in my applications, as I
believe a proper separation of concerns is very important in building an
application, as from I personally experienced when developing in PHP
with CodeIgniter, it really makes development much easier.

So, I think for an event driven application pattern such as WPF,
Silverlight, and also WP7, (maybe Windows 8 as well), it seems pretty
obvious to take advantage of the existing abstraction of the framework,
so MVVM would go well with these kind of applications.

I can understand the concept of the [MVVM pattern][link1] itself quite well,
but I am not really able to grasp its implementation, I think it is
because I don't really understand the basic features of the framework
that the pattern rely on. One of which is the Data Binding. So, here it
is, my attempt to get better understanding on it.


    :::xml
    <TextBlock Text="{Binding Name}"></TextBlock>

while in the code behind,

    :::csharp
    namespace PhoneApp1
    {
        public partial class MainPage : PhoneApplicationPage
        {
            public MyClass dataSource;
            public MainPage()
            {
                InitializeComponent();
                dataSource = new MyClass();
                dataSource.name = "Hello";
                this.DataContext = this.dataSource;
            }
        }

        public class MyClass
        {
            private string _name;
            public string name
            {
                get { return _name; }
                set { _name = value; }
            }
        }
    }

There is one problem with this, when the value of the data source
changes, the binding target on the UI won’t change along with it, so, to
make the value of the binding target change along with the data source,
we need to have our class implement `INotifyPropertyChanged`.

Let’s add a button that will change the value of the data source.

    ::xml
    <TextBlock Text="{Binding name}"></TextBlock>
    <Button Content="Button" Name="button1" Click="button1_Click"/>

And change the code behind to:

    :::csharp
    namespace PhoneApp1
    {
        public partial class MainPage : PhoneApplicationPage
        {
            // Constructor
            public MyClass dataSource;
            public int i = 0;
            public MainPage()
            {
                InitializeComponent();
                dataSource = new MyClass();
                dataSource.name = "Hello";
                this.DataContext = this.dataSource;
            }
            private void button1_Click(object sender, RoutedEventArgs e)
            {
                i++;
                this.dataSource.name = i.ToString();
            }
        }

        public class MyClass : INotifyPropertyChanged
        {
            private string _name;
            public string name
            {
                get { return _name; }
                set
                {
                    if (value != _name)
                    {
                        _name = value;
                        Notify("name");
                    }
                }
            }

            public event PropertyChangedEventHandler PropertyChanged;
            void Notify(string propertyName)
            {
                if (this.PropertyChanged != null)
                {
                    PropertyChanged(this, new PropertyChangedEventArgs(propertyName));
                }
            }
        }
    }

Now, every time we click on the button, the value of the name property
will change, and the `TextBlock` will change its content accordingly.

The `INotifyPropertyChanged` interface exposes the `PropertyChanged` event,
where we would raise when the value of the data is changed, and there
are the event handler present. One might ask, why? It is because when
the class is being used as a data source in a binding, the binding
target will subscribe to the event, and call the necessary method to
update the view.

There are several modes of binding, the default is `OneWay`, which is a
binding from the data source to the target, where any changes on the
data source will be propagated to the target, but not vice versa,
another mode is `TwoWay`, which is pretty much self descriptive, and also
`OneTime`, which only set the data when the binding is created. So, if we
add this textbox to the previous example,

    :::xml
    <TextBox Text="{Binding name,Mode=TwoWay}"/>

Whenever the value of the textbox is changed, the textblock that is
bound to the same data source will update its value accordingly. Note
that we would still need to implement `INotifyPropertyChanged` for the
view to update as the value changes. We can specify what triggers the
update back to the source via the `UpdateSourceTrigger` property. Its
values depends on the dependency properties of the target, on the
example textbox above, the default trigger is `LostFocus`, so the data
source will be notified of the new value when the textbox has lost its
focus. We can also trigger the update manually by setting the property
to `Explicit`, which will only update the value when the application calls
`UpdateSource`, e.g. when the user clicks on a button.

There are several [ways][link2] to specify a binding source, the examples
above specified the data source by setting the `DataContext` property of
the current page from the code behind. The child elements within the
page inherit the `DataContext` from its parent, we can see that this
method is very convenient when we have a single data source that we use
across the page. We can also set the `DataContext` property directly on
the element directly, instead of inheriting it from its parent. To
specify the data source for an element individually, one of the is by
setting the Source property of the element, by setting the Source
property, the data will be able to get the data from the source that it
specify without depending on the data source of its parent element.
Other options are [RelativeSource][link3], which is used to specify the data
source relative to the target, and [ElementName][link4] which is useful if you
want to bind to another element in your view, e.g. binding the height of
an element to a textbox value.

The examples above shows binding among data source and target of the
same data type, e.g. string to string, but there are times where we may
want to bind a source of a different data type, for example, binding the
background colour of an element to an hexadecimal value, or displaying
the same date in several different format. One way would be to create an
additional property with a getter that gets its value from the source,
but that isn’t a very good way, for one thing, two-way binding and
property changed notification got more complicated than it should be.
One solution is to use the `ValueConverter`, which is creating a custom
class that implements the [IValueConverter][link5] interface. I won’t talk
about it too much in this post, maybe in some other post, you can read
more about it on that link. .NET Framework also provide a number of
converter that we can use.

So far, the examples shows only binding to a single data type, but we
often need to bind to a collection, for example, binding a listbox to a
list of person. To implement a collection, we can use one of the generic
collection classes, such as, `List<T>`, `Collection<T>` and others. We can
also implement a custom collection by implementing the `IEnumerable`
interface, but to enable automatic UI update on change, we need a way to
provide notification on data changes, just as we did with the single
instance data source. To do that, the collection need to implement the
[INotifyPropertyChanged][link6] interface,
but it is recommended to use the class provided by the .NET Framework
which did the job for us, the `ObservabeCollection<T>` class. Let’s change
the previous example to show a little bit of collection binding. Lets
add a listbox to the our application.

    :::xml
    <ListBox Name="listBox1"ItemsSource="{Binding colls}"/>

Now, let’s change the `MyClass` a little bit, and change the previous
button click handler to add more element to the collection.

    :::csharp
    namespace PhoneApp1
    {
        public partial class MainPage : PhoneApplicationPage
        {
            // Constructor
            public MyClass dataSource;
            public int i = 0;
            public MainPage()
            {
                InitializeComponent();
                dataSource = new MyClass();
                dataSource.name = "Hello";
                dataSource.colls = new ObservableCollection<string>() { "string 1", "string 2"};
                this.DataContext = this.dataSource;
            }

            private void button1_Click(object sender, RoutedEventArgs e)
            {
                i++;
                this.dataSource.name = i.ToString();
                dataSource.colls.Add(i.ToString());
            }
        }

        public class MyClass : INotifyPropertyChanged
        {
            private string _name;
            public string name
            {
                get { return _name; }
                set
                {
                    if (value != _name)
                    {
                        _name = value;
                        Notify("name");
                    }
                }
            }

            public ObservableCollection<string> colls { get; set; }
            public event PropertyChangedEventHandler PropertyChanged;
            void Notify(string propertyName)
            {
                if (this.PropertyChanged != null)
                {
                    PropertyChanged(this, new PropertyChangedEventArgs(propertyName));
                }
            }
        }
    }

Now, whenever we click the button, a new string will be added to the
collection, and the listbox content will reflect the changes as well
because of the `INotifyCollectionChanged` that is implemented by the
`ObservableCollection`. Note that to detect when the value of individual
element change, we still need to implement `INotifyPropertyChanged`.

Now, when we are working with a collection of data, often we need to
filter, sort and group the data based on the current context of the
application, to do that without changing the underlying data source, we
can use collections view. I wouldn’t talk much about it in this post,
but more information about it are available [here][link7] and [here][link8]

On the examples above, we declared our data bindings mostly with XAML,
and that is indeed the most common usage of data binding, so let’s talk
more about it. On our examples above, we declared a binding with the
`{Binding name}`. This is actually a shortcut to declare the binding, we
know that the child element will get its binding `Source` from its parents
`DataContext`, and we can actually declare a path to specify which
property of the source that we want to bind to. So, that declaration
just now can be written as `{Binding Source={StaticResource dataSource},Path=name}`. We can use StaticResource to refer to an
instance that we declare in the XAML, so to declare our `dataSource` in
XAML, we can use something like this:

    :::xml
    <Page xmlns:c="clr-namespace:PhoneApp1">
    <phone:PhoneApplicationPage.Resources>
      <c:MyClass x:Key="dataSource"/>
    </phone:PhoneApplicationPage.Resources>

If the the `dataContext` itself is the data source that we want to bind
to, we can just declare the binding with simply `{Binding}`.

## References:
* <http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/3665/Data-binding-concepts-in-NET-windows-forms>
* <http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms752347.aspx>
* <http://www.codeproject.com/Articles/80555/Databinding-in-Silverlight-applications>
* <http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc278072(v=vs.95).aspx>

[link1]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/magazine/dd419663.aspx
[link2]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms746695.aspx
[link3]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.windows.data.binding.relativesource.aspx
[link4]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.windows.data.binding.elementname.aspx
[link5]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.windows.data.ivalueconverter.aspx
[link6]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.collections.specialized.inotifycollectionchanged.aspx
[link7]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms752347.aspx#how_to_implement_collections\
[link8]: http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/system.windows.data.collectionviewsource.aspx
