Title: Setting Up Python on Windows
Date: 2012-03-22 11:47
Tags: programming, python, windows
Category: Software


Well, it’s a bit late for posting this, considering I have been playing
with Python for few months as I posted before, but, I recently
reinstalled my Windows, so I need to setup everything once again. This
time, I am trying to do it the right way, and my previous Python setup
isn’t really completely setup anyway, since I did most of my python
related works on my Linux Mint install. But recently, I have been
spending more time on Windows because of various things, so, well, here
goes. The distribution system in Python is a little but complicated, but
you can read more about it [here][link1] and [here][link2].

Basically, the standard Python distribution utilities is the distutils,
with it, you can install from the package source with **python setup.py
install**. But there some problems with it, one of them is that it has
no way to track dependencies between packages, so there are other tools
that try to solve that problem, one of which is the **setuptools**. When
you install the setuptools, it allows you to package your scripts and
specify any dependencies with it, which can be installed via its
distribution system, `easy_install` which allows you to install
packages with `easy_install package_name`. But, the setuptools
introduces another set of problem, where it causes weird behaviour and
some packages unusable unless it is installed via setuptools. So, the
recommended way to package and distribute python package is to use plain
vanilla distutils to package the scripts, and use **pip** for
distribution. Instead of specifying dependencies in the setup.py file,
it allows you to create a separate file to specify the dependencies, and
process that instead. There are also **distribute** which is a fork of
setuptools that tries to solve some of its shortcomings.

Ok, now that we got clear, lets actually start setting up python, the
first one is installing Python itself, simple enough, download the MSI
installer, run it, and Python is now installed. The next step is adding
the python directory to the PATH environment variables. This is so that
you can run the various python commands without typing the full path.
The first one to add is the Python root directory (C:\\Python27 in my
case), and also the Scripts directory (C:\\Python27\\Scripts in my case). I
didn’t add the second one to the PATH before, I wondered why can’t I run
commands such as pip and virtualenv directly before. and another thing,
I recently watched a video from pycon 2012 talking about the state of
Python on Windows, and I think the speaker mentioned something about the
new releases of Python installers for Windows includes the option to add
the environment variables and also have some of the directory structure
changed, but as I only watched the video briefly, I am not sure whether
it only applies to the new Python 3.x release or to the 2.x release as
well. I think I will just update it later.

By now, you can say that Python is already completely setup on Windows,
but there are several other packages that should be installed.

The first one is to get a python package manager, which can be used to
install and manage the installed packages on your system. There are
several options you can choose, I am using distribute together with pip.
To install distribute, the easiest way is download the
[distribute_setup.py][link3], and run it. To install pip, you can download
the zip files from http://pypi.python.org/pypi/pip, extract it, navigate
to the folder, and run python setup.py install.

The next thing you should do is to install virtualenv. virtualenv is
basically a little python utility to setup a virtual isolated python
installation apart from your main python installation. With it, you can
install different version of the same libraries at the same time without
having them conflicts with each other. To install it, the easiest would
be to use pip that you installed before, so, run pip install virtualenv.

After you install it, you can run the command virtualenv ENV to create a
new virtualenv named ENV. Activate it by going into `ENV\scripts\activate`
which should change your shell prompt accordingly. Now any new packages
changes will be made locally to the active virtualenv without affecting
the global installation. After you are done, you can deactivate it and
switch back to the main python installation by running
`ENV\scripts\deactivate.bat`.

Next thing to do is to install django itself. Make sure your virtualenv
is active, unless you want django to be installed to the main django
installation. The easiest way to install django is to use pip: `pip install django`.

And, you’re done! easy, isn’t it? You can test it by running the python
shell, and type import django. If there is no error, then you’re good to
go. Now, if you installed your django into your virtualenv, trying to
run `django-admin.py` might gives you an `ImportError` saying the it can’t
find the django.core module. This is because the .py file extensions are
associated with the main Python installation in your computer, and
running `django-admin.py` directly from the command line will cause it to
run the script with that Python installation which doesn’t have django
installed, so, what you can do is either run the script with python
manually by specify the path of the `django-admin.py`, or you can modify
your virtualenv activate script to change the file association, either
way, its up to you.

[link1]: http://www.b-list.org/weblog/2008/dec/14/packaging/
[link2]: http://blog.ianbicking.org/2008/12/14/a-few-corrections-to-on-packaging/
[link3]: http://python-distribute.org/distribute_setup.py
