Title: Python Learning Progress Part 1
Date: 2012-01-09 19:55
Tags: programming, python
Category: Software

Ok, so last time I mentioned that I began learning Python. with the Zed
Shaw’s Learn Python The Hard Way as a guide, so far, it has been a
pretty good experience. So, in this blog, I will try to summarize what I
learned by trying to explain it in a way that I think easy to
understand, in doing that I hope I can get more understanding about it.

Before I begin, let me say my impression with it so far. With C++ as the
first programming language I learned, and the majority of my codes
written in fully object oriented language such as Java and C#, I find a
scripting language such as Python to be “different”. To begin with, the
dynamic typed variables, where a variable can be of any type, an
integer, a floating point number, a string, or even a function. Most
people says this is one of Python’s strength, but so far, I haven’t been
able to figure out how this will help me in creating programs other than
creating some confusion. Maybe its just me that hasn’t reached the point
where I can actually take advantage of a dynamically type language such
as Python.

Anyway, lets go back to the main topic where I will try to explain
Python in a way where I find easy to understand. I wont be talking about
the installation of the Python, since its pretty straight forward both
on Windows and Linux. So I will start with the coding part.

Like most programming language guide, I will begin with a simple hello
world application. The hello world in Python is very simple.

    :::python
    print "Hello, World"

That’s all, save it as with a .py extension, and run the command `python filename.py`
 in the cmd/terminal to run it. Another alternative is to run
command python in the cmd/terminal to enter the python shell, where the
python commands can be entered and run like a command prompt
instruction.

The print statement is pretty straight forward, it will produce the
output to the screen. Each of the print statement will print the output
in a new line, so,

    :::python
    #These will print these two things on a different line
    print "Hello,"
    print "Its a wonderful world"

Will print ‘Hello, World’ and ’It’s a wonderful world.’ in a separate
line, and by the way, the ‘#’ characters comments out the line, so that
it will be ignored by the Python interpreter. Math are also very simple,
as usual, combinations of operators and number will do the job.

    :::python
    print 2+(3-1)*9

The variables in python are dynamically typed, so a variable can be an
integer, a string, or any other type depending on the value.

    :::python
    x = 10
    y = 5

    #will print 15
    print x+y

    #and we can change it to a value of a different type
    x = "Now this is a string"

    #we can still print it in the same way
    print x
