Title: Python Learning – Part 3
Date: 2012-01-12 20:10
Tags: programming, python
Category: Software

Well, I was pretty busy this week, and I haven’t touch too much of
Python these days, and even if if I done some exercise on Python, I was
too lazy to write up a blog post for it, but I promised I will blog more
to keep track of my progress, so here I am writing this.

Ok, so this time, I want to talk about the getting input from the user,
and  flow control in Python, in other words, I am going to talk about
conditional statement and loop.

Let’s start with the user input. The basic input function in python is
`raw_input()`, which gets whatever the user entered, and process it as a
string. You can pass an optional string argument that will be used as
the prompt, here is an example code:

    :::python
    print "What is your name?"

    name = raw_input()
    print "Hello, %s"%name

    #or you can pass the prompt as an argument

    name = raw_input("What is your name?")
    print "Hello, %s",%name

Another option is to use the `input()`, which is is similar to the
`raw_input`, except that the user input isn’t processed as a string, but
as an expression. So, if you entered a number, it will process the input
as a number, or if you entered an variable name, it will be processed as
an variable, and so on

    :::python
    # x is 5
    x = input("Enter a number: ") #enter '5'

    # x is 12
    x = input("Enter another number: ") #enter '4*3'

    # this will produce an error, because John is not defined as a variable

    y = input("Enter a name: ") #enter 'John'
    # y will be equal to x, because the input will be processed as avariable

    y = input("Enter a letter: ") #enter 'x'

Ok, the next part is where things start to get fun, the basic flow
control in python using if, elif, and else. Before I begin, let me talk
a little bit about code blocks and boolean values. Code blocks are
basically a group of code, which can consist of one or more statements
and declarations. In addition, the variables inside a code block are
isolated from the code outside of the block, so a variable declared
inside a code block cant be used outside of the block. Code blocks are
used in many places in programming, one of them is the conditional and
looping statements. Code blocks are expressed in various ways in
different programming languages, some of them uses the curly braces { }
(C++, C#, Java), some of them uses the BEGIN and END (VB) keyword, and
in Python, we uses indentation (4 spaces), so the codes that are
indented  are considered as a block of code, and to nest several levels
of code blocks, just add more indentation to the lines of code.

Boolean values are basically logical true or false values. Comparison
operators will always return a boolean value of either true or false,
even though comparison operators are not the only thing that can return
a boolean value, it is the basics of it. Comparison operations in Python
are pretty much self-explanatory, and it is similar to other programming
language:

    :::python
    #Equal
    5 == 5 #True
    5 != 5 #False

    #Greater than/Equal
    5 > 5 #False
    5 >= 5 #True

    #Less than/Equal
    5 < 5 #False
    5 <= 5 #True
    3 < 5 #True
    10 > 2 #True
    5 != 10 #True

    # there are also the 'and', 'or', and 'not' keyword
    # and will evaluate to true if both are true
    # or will evaluate to true if one of the is true
    # and not will produce the reverse value

    3 == 3 and 1 < 3 #True
    3 != 3 and 1 < 3 #False
    3 != 3 or 2 <5 #True
    not 3 == 3 #False

    #and so on

I am not sure how to explain code indentation in plain english, so let
me just write some example if statement code,

    :::python
    x = input("Please enter a number: ")
    if x > 10:
        print "You entered a number greater than 10"
    elif x < 5:
        print "You entered a number that is less than 5"
    else:
        print "You entered a number between 5 and 10"

As you can see, the if statement will test if the statement
is true or not, followed by a colon and an indented lines to specify
which code to execute if the statement evaluates to true, the next elif
statement will be executed only if the first if statement is false, and
it will test it the statement again. You can put as many elif statement
as you want, and finally, an else statement is put there to specify
which code to execute if all of the tests before it evaluate to false.
The elif and the else statement are optional, which means you can write
a code to only run when a certain condition is met, or do nothing if
that certain condition is not met.

    :::python
    x = raw_input("Enter your name: ")

    #Only print these statements if the name is John
    if x == "John":
        print "Hello, John! Good to see you again."
        print "What can I do for you today, %s"%x

The next thing I am going to talk about is looping. Similar
to the conditional statement, looping uses code blocks to specify
several statements of code to run as well. There are two ways to create
a loop, the first one is the while loop, which will continue to run as
long as the boolean statement remains true.

    :::python
    # This one will run the loop endlessly, because the boolean statement
    # is hardcoded as True
    while True:
        print "Never ending loop"
        print "Press ctrl-c or ctrl-z to terminate"

    # You should add a statement to eventually cause the boolean statement
    # turns False
    x = 1 #initialize x to 1
    while x < 10: #continue to run the loop as long as the value of x < 10
        print "Count no.%d"%x
        x += 1 #increase the value of x by one on each iterations
               #so that eventually the x < 10 statement will be false


The second type of loop is the for loop, which will loop through the
content of a list one by one. (I will talk about list in another post,
but basically, a list is just a sequence of values that is identified by
a single variable).

    :::python
    # the basic syntax of a for loop is:
    # for [variable name] in [list]:
    # #codes for the loop
    # for example:

    #Defining a list, more on this later
    nameList = ['John', 'Jack', 'Adam']

    # running the loop, printing the content of the list
    # one by one

    for name in nameList:
        print "Hello,%s"%name

    # The code above will print John,Jack and Adam on the console
    # You can also generate a list of numbers by using the range function
    # the range function takes two arguments, the beginning and the end of
    the list

    # Will print the numbers 2-10
    for i in range(2,10):
        print i
