Title: Setting Up Stuffs on Linux
Date: 2013-06-14 19:41
Tags: linux, python, ruby, node
Category: Software

My Linux system has been pretty much set up for most things I need, since of course, Linux Mint itself comes with a lot of stuffs such as python, and such. I myself am pretty surprised how much I have settled in. Still, there are still a number of stuffs that I need to add. First of, the utilities that includes stuffs such as gcc, cmake, curl, and all the stuff.

    sudo apt-get install build-essential curl

#Python
Python 2.7 comes pre-installed on most Linux system, so there isn't much to do here. Python 3 has started to gain more traction these days, with a lot of projects has been ported to it, and some new ones that are written in it. The day where I would have to deal with Python versions aren't too far, but for now, I don't have much use for it yet, so 2.7 is good enough for me. I do need to install the development header for some of the libraries that might need it though, so:

    sudo apt-get install python-dev

## pip, virtualenv, virtualenvwrapper
The apt-get for Python, tool to manage isolated Python packages, and a wrapper to make using it easy.

    sudo apt-get install python-pip
    sudo pip install --upgrade pip
    sudo pip install virtualenv
    sudo pip install virtualenvwrapper

Those command first install `pip` from the software repository, then use `pip` to update itself from the PyPI since the one in the software repository can be severely outdated, and then install `virtualenv` and `virtualenvwrapper`. To finish up installing `virtualenvwrapper`, put this somewhere in the startup script (`~/.zshrc` in my case). Of course change the path according the the configuration.

    export WORKON_HOME=$HOME/.venvs
    export PROJECT_HOME=$HOME/Projects
    source /usr/local/bin/virtualenvwrapper.sh


#Ruby
I don't actually know how to program in Ruby. At All. But, there are a bunch of cools tools written in Ruby that are simply can't be replaced easily, things like [SCSS][l1] and [guard-livereload][l2]. I don't want to spend too much time on this, so I just took the first guide I found and follow it. I am supposed to use [rvm][l3] to to manage the ruby versions. So, the stuff I did:

curl -L https://get.rvm.io | bash

And wait for it to finish, it might take a while. In my case, I ran into an error about it not being able to install some of the requirements, so what I did was check the log, and take the stuffs that failed to install and install them manually via apt-get. Worked for me. After it is done doing its things, put this somewhere in the startup script:

    source $HOME/.rvm/scripts/rvm

Then, install the version of ruby you want to use:

    rvm install 1.9.3
    rvm -default use 1.9.3

It is done. Maybe install some essential gems:

    gem install bundler, sass, guard


#Node.js
I am actually not sure what I am going to do with Node.js, but it is an interesting piece of technology with its full-async execution model. So, I just installed it, maybe I'll play with it at sometime. There are many ways to install node.js on a linux system. The official way is to download and install it from source, but since I am don't want to spend too much time dealing with something that I am not sure I will use anyway, I installed it from an un-official PPA:

    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:chris-lea/node.js
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install nodejs

And that will install `npm` as well. kind of like `pip` of the node.js world I guess.


#Others
##Mono
The open source .NET implementation. Ability to use the awesome C# and MonoGame.

    sudo apt-get install mono-complete

##Android-SDK?
I know I am going to need this sooner or later, but dealing with Java isn't just my favorite thing to do. I think the new Android Studio is supposed to make installing the SDKs and Android system images easier without having to deal with eclipse plugins and stuff, but still, removing OpenJDK, installing Oracle-JDK, and stuff... later, I guess.

##Go?
I am not sure if I want to install this. The hype around it has been drawing my attention to it.

[l1]: https://github.com/nex3/sass
[l2]: https://github.com/guard/guard-livereload
[l3]: https//rvm.io
