Title: On Learning to Program
Date: 2015-02-15 14:57
Tags: programming, advice, learning
Summary: My 2 cents for people learning how to program.
Status: draft

The learn-to-code movement has been making a lot of waves in the past year. All kinds of code bootcamp programs has been popping up in many cities as well. Each of them usually focuses on a certain topic, some teach Ruby on Rails, some other teach mobile app development for iOS or Android, but many of them promise to make you know enough programming to be employable by the end of the course.

I don't know if these programs is actually effective in producing capable software engineers, I'm quite skeptical, to be honest. I agree with [Jeff Atwood's opinion](http://blog.codinghorror.com/please-dont-learn-to-code/) in that we as programmers rather overrated our trade's importance. I am aware that software is eating the world, but I believe software is still nothing more than just a tool to make our job easier. A mean, not an end by itself. The ability to think of a process logically and critically is more important than knowing how to type out å code for most people. There is also a side of me that whispers the fact that the world of technology is associated with the world of VC investing more than ever and that can be both a good and a bad thing.

That said, I know first hand the how much knowing how to program can empowers yourself. It is indeed a very rewarding activity by itself. While have my own share of skepticism on the whole learn-to-code movement, for those who are genuinely interested in learning how to code, these programs can be very beneficial.


// Consider Making these below as a separate post.