Title: Me, an Average Programmer
Date: 2014-10-06 12:55
Summary: I am still nowhere near where I want to be, but I am farther up the road.
Status: draft

-- Draft: Make the post less emotional and more to the point

I am a professional programmer, but, unlike a lot of programmers appear to be, I didn’t spend my childhood coding a game on a Commodore or writing a program for Apple II. In fact, even though I have always been a geek, I wasn’t really interested in programming until much, much later.

I still remember the time when my parents bought me and my brother a computer. I was in the fifth grade, and my brother was in the 7th. My uncle just opened a computer shop and my brother’s school curriculum now includes an hour of computer lesson every week (a push to improve computer literacy, I guess). So, to support my uncle’s new venture and so that me and my brother can learn more about computer, my parents purchased one for us even though they didn’t know how to use it or have any interest in learning it. I still remember that during the time, for some reason, people have this belief of if you know how to use a computer, you wouldn’t have a problem securing a job, that the computer is the future. I think this was around 2001. Now that I know more about the industry and its history, I wonder if the tech bubble had something to do with it. I didn’t care though. I only thought about playing games on it.

The computer was an Pentium machine ( I don’t remember which one, II or III ) running Windows 98. I still remember playing around the OS and discovering a cool feature every now and then. One of the things I loved to play was the desktop theme. When I found out that I can change the colour scheme, icons, and sound effects, I was so fascinated by it that I switched the theme several times every time I turned the computer on. The computer came with a number of software pre-installed, including a few video games. My uncle taught me and my brother how to start some of the games, and with it, he also gave us an instruction not to click anything that is labelled “Uninstall” since that will break the computer. Of course, we clicked it anyway. Of course, that removes a bunch of stuff from the computer, and we were whining that the computer broke, because the game can’t be started. So, we called by uncle, and he installed the game again, and of course, a few days after that, we uninstalled it again. I don’t even know why were we so obsessed with the “Uninstall”. Believe it or not, even though it was 2001 and the dot-com bubble has come and went, consumer internet didn’t really exist in my hometown until several years later. So, without internet, for me and by brother, that box in front of us was everything we knew about computer. Every now and then, my uncle came and installed some new games for us, and we would play that game all the time till we got bored.

Being your average nerd, I sucked at sports. I was bored by school. I played bunch of computer games. I loved Anime and Manga . When I got into high school, instead of going to a conventional high school, I applied for a vocational school. Not because I have an idea on what I wanted to do, it was mostly because it was pretty close to my house, and my brother and a lot of my relatives went to the same school as well. At the time I applied, the school has just started a new program, called Computer Networking. Since the other majors (Accounting, Hospitality, Office Administration, etc) didn’t interest me at all, I chose to major in Computer Networking, not because I enjoyed the subjects. I didn’t even know what kind of stuff I would get to learn by choosing that major. The only reason I chose the major was because I know that I wouldn’t enjoy the other options, also, I naively thought that we are going to spend a bunch of time playing around with computers.

Throughout the years, I played a bunch of video games, and I was pretty good at most of them. I enjoyed the challenge. I always try to finish all the game that I picked up, sometimes even when I didn’t really enjoy the game. Around the time I got into high school, consumer internet has started to spread around. Even though I didn’t have internet connection at home, there are cyber cafes pretty much everywhere and they are pretty affordable. So, being a gamer that I am, I frequented a bunch of gaming forums and message board ( I probably would have downloaded a bunch of them too if it weren’t for the download speed that were way too slow). Got access to a bunch of information, strategies, and cheats.

I believe cheating in games played a significant role in putting me in the path that got me to be a programmer. As many gamers probably can understand, certain games can get seriously tedious to play, and at that point, most probably would resort to cheating. At first, I only played around with cheat code and exploits that I got to know from information on the internet, then I got to know about Game Trainers, and, after a while, the cheat and hacks I found on the internet just doesn’t cut it anymore. Sometimes I don’t want to have 9.999.999.999 Gold and immortality. I wanted more control. Eventually, I found something else that I enjoyed in trying to cheat in games. I loved the thrill of bending the rules of the games, sometimes even more than the game itself.

At the beginning, I used simple tools such as Cheat Engine to modify memory values, and then I eventually dropped to a debugger to change how the game behave, and with it, I learned a little bit of assembly language to help me understand how the game work. I also got into playing MMORPGs, and being the cheapskate that I am, I refused to pay for in-game items. I tried to cheat in the game as well. None of techniques that I had learned hacking single-player games worked. I was stumped. Then I learned how multiplayer games stores the game data on the server, and attempting to change the game data on my computer is only going my account banned. Of course, being the cheapskate that refused to pay for in-game item while at the same time being a lazy ass that refused to spend hours grinding, I looked for other ways to get what I want. Initially, I simply wrote a simple automation using AutoIt that simulates key strokes and mouse clicks. It worked pretty well, but with this approach, I had to keep the game window active and couldn’t do anything else the computer, and since I played the game from a cyber cafe, I can’t exactly just leave the place to do something place either. After some searching, I learned about packet monitoring tools like Wireshark, with it, I can simulate game activity and run the bot even without starting the game client. Later, as I got even more greedy, I tried to look into more advanced things like how to run the bot on multiple accounts at the same time, make the bot harder to detect, make it smarter and die less often, and so on. I realised I had to learn some programming. So I googled around for some programming tutorials, and so I downloaded the DevC++ and tried to learn some C++.

Around the time I learned about looping and conditional in C++, I got distracted again. This time by Computer Graphics. I am sure many gamers are inspired by the graphics in the games they played and wondered how they can create something like it. Some of my favourite games are the Final Fantasy Series, and as many fans would know the CG in those games are simply amazing. So, I set out to find out how to create these CGs as well. I downloaded a bunch of software packages to learn how to create these art. I played around with Photoshop, 3ds Max, Maya, Zbrush, and a bunch of other things as well. While I was learning how to use Photoshop, I got into photo-manipulation as well. None of this actually got anywhere though, while I learned a bit on how to use these software packages, my artistic ability are still in the dump.  While I was still messing around with 3D modelling and other visual arts, I graduated from high school. Like many people my age, I was confused on what I wanted to do. I was very fortunate to get a scholarship offer from a government program, but I didn’t know if furthering my education is what I wanted, or if it is the right choice for me.

Before I got the scholarship offer, I never even thought about going to a university to study. At the time, I had been working part-time as a computer technician for quite a while, and I was going to go full-time at the job until i figured out what I wanted to do. Well, I ended up taking the scholarship offer, majored in Computer Science, got set on a track to a career in tech, and became a programmer. Well, actually, its not that straightforward. I majored in Computer Network and Security, and for the first few years, I don’t have any interest in software engineering. But then again, that will be a story for another day.

So well, that’s it. I know, after such a long-winded article, its kind of anti-climactic to end my story this way, and I’m pretty sure its a pretty boring story too. But, that is my story. I was not some kind of computer whiz who wrote a computer program at the age of six. I wasn’t even seriously interested in programming until my second year of university. To this day I am still not sure where my life is going. There are many things that I wanted to do, but I don’t know how to get there. I am not some kind of celebrity programmer. I haven’t produced anything of significant value. I am still learning new things everyday. I am a pretty average programmer, and I am okay with it.
